book/front-matter/intro.md, before:

# Preface

Microbes are everywhere. We have found these tiny organisms in the deepest regions of the ocean and in the upper atmosphere. We have found them in water that has been solid ice for millennia in the Antarctic and in boiling water in the geysers of Yellowstone National Park. They survive in the driest natural environments on Earth, including the Atacama Desert in Chile, where desiccation resistant microbes hide in the soil sometimes waiting ten years for the drop of rain that will jump start their metabolism long enough for them to reproduce before they return to dormancy. We find them in perpetually damp environments, like the intestinal tract of the human body where they are constantly the subject of inspection by our diligent immune cells, and where they impact our health in positive and negative ways that we are only beginning to understand. We have found microbes in our nuclear reactors, prompting questions about whether we could harness them as tiny machines to help us remediate environmental disasters of the past, present, and future. If we looked hard enough, I think we’d find them on the surface of the moon and Mars, though they are probably microbes who stowed away on our spacecraft and are now patiently waiting for a drop of water that may or may not ever show up. If we ever colonize those worlds, microbes will be an indispensable ally in creating an environment that could sustain us.

Microbes almost never live alone in the real world (i.e., outside of a laboratory). Rather they exist in communities of different species who are interacting with each other and their environment. Some of these communities will have many different types of organisms, and some will have only a few. Because of the large number of species and individuals involved, no two communities will ever be exactly alike, and quantifying differences between microbial communities is an important area of research at the moment. The types of interactions between organisms are also highly varied. These can include mutualistic relationships, where both organisms benefit from the interaction; parasitic relationships, where one organism exclusively benefits to the detriment of the other; and the full gradient in between. 

Relatively recently, the term microbiome has been used to describe the community of microbes in a given environment. Technically speaking, the term microbiome is said to refer to the collection of microbial genes across all of the microbes present in a given environment while the term microbiota refers to the collection of the organisms themselves. In practice, especially in popular science literature but also in the primary scientific literature, the term microbiome is used to refer to microbiota, and that’s how I’ll use it in this text. If I’m referring to the collective genes of microbiota, I’ll use the term microbial metagenome. 

In spite of their ubiquity and importance, our understanding of microbes and microbiomes is still in its infancy. As we crack their mysteries we stand to make major advances in basic and applied sciences. We’ll develop a better understanding of the origin of life on Earth, the processes of evolution including the origin of multicellular organisms, and rules governing the interaction of species in the environment. We will also develop tools that will help us improve human health, support sustainable agriculture, and reduce our impact on our planet. In other words, we’re in the midst of a scientific revolution that could improve our lives, our children’s lives, and our world. 

Microbiome science is everywhere. There are tens of articles published daily in the scientific literature, and many popular science articles and books present these findings to the world of non-scientists. Understainding the promises and limitations of the methods of microbiome science can help avoid misconceptions about microbiome research, and it's important for practioners of microbiome science to understand and convey the promise and limitations of our field. Misconceptions abound, frequently arising from the same sources as high-quality popular science microbiome reporting. For example, on 5 Feb 2015 [an article](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/06/nyregion/among-the-new-york-city-subways-millions-of-riders-a-study-finds-many-mystery-microbes.html) appeared in the New York Times noting (almost offhand) that _Yersinia pestis_, the organism responsible for bubonic plague, had been found in multiple locations throughout the New York City subway system as part of its normal built environment microbiome. This was rapidly followed up on 6 Feb 2015 with [an article](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/07/nyregion/bubonic-plague-in-the-subway-system-dont-worry-about-it.html) noting that there was probably not bubonic plague on the subway system after all, but rather that the approaches used by the research team are limited in their taxonomic resolution, and that likely a harmless close relative of _Y. pestis_ was observedi: "What the researchers probably found, [a spokesman for the university where the study originated] said, was bacteria from an unknown species or from organisms that happened to share some gene sequences with the plague bacterium...". As microbiome services and products are increasingly marketed directly to the public, consumers of microbiome research findings, products, and services need to know how to critically evaluate these offerings and their associated claims. As practioners in the field, we can help by ensuring that the methods we apply are appropriate and reliable, and that we make our work accessible. 

The technologies that are enabling work in microbiome science are the same that are driving the data revolution in biology. Primarily this work is driven by high-throughput DNA sequencing, which is applied for profiling microbial community composition (e.g., marker gene profiling such as 16S or ITS sequencing), functional potential (such as shotgun metagenomic sequencing), and functional activity (such as metatranscriptome sequencing). Other “omics” technologies are now playing an increasing role in microbiome research, such as mass-spectrometry-based metabolomics, which provides profiles of small molecule metabolites in an environment, and metaproteomics which provides more detailed descriptions of functional activities of microbes (and their hosts, if applicable). As a result, bioinformatics software tools are essential to microbiome research. For many microbiome researchers, bioinformatics is an intimidating and challenging aspect of their projects. 

My focus for the past decade has been on developing tools to empower researchers to analyze their microbiome data. This work is centered around the QIIME microbiome bioinformatics platform, and currently QIIME 2. The original QIIME, now referred to as [QIIME 1](http://qiime.org), was published in 2010 {cite}`qiime1` and has been [cited tens of thousands of times in the primary literature](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=16903127068530972426&as_sdt=805&sciodt=0,3&hl=en). QIIME 2, which was published in July of 2019 {cite}`qiime2`, [succeeded QIIME 1 on 1 January 2018](https://qiime.wordpress.com/2018/01/03/qiime-2-has-succeeded-qiime-1/). QIIME 2 is better than QIIME 1 in all ways, and QIIME 1 is no longer actively supported. If you have previously used QIIME 1, you should invest time in learning and switching to QIIME 2. If you're new to QIIME, start with QIIME 2. (When I refer to _QIIME_ in this book, without specifying whether I'm referring to QIIME 1 or QIIME 2, I'm refering to the platform generally.)

QIIME 2 has large and growing user and developer communities, and these communities make QIIME 2 possible. The epicenter of the community is the [QIIME 2 Forum](https://forum.qiime2.org). The forum is primarily known as a place where users can get technical support with QIIME 2 for no charge. Developers of QIIME 2 moderate the forum, and typically repond to technical support questions within a couple of business days. The forum is also a great place to discuss general topics in microbiome bioinformatics, or microbiome research methods generally. There are many active discussions on these topics on the forum. Keeping up with the discussions on the forum is a great way to learn about current topics in microbiome research methods. There's also a free job board on the forum - you can use the forum to find jobs, or post your own job ads there to find employees who are well-versed in QIIME 2 and other bioinformatics tools. If you're not already a member of the QIIME 2 Forum, you should consider joining. It's a great way for you to get help, and as you develop your QIIME 2 skills helping others on the forum is a great way to reenforce your learning and to get involved in the community.

The QIIME 2 project is popular, essential to microbiome research, and (as of this writing) stabley funded through federal and other grants. Time spent reading this book and learning QIIME 2 will help you to advance your microbiome research projects. This book can be used for self-learning, as a companion text in [QIIME 2 workshops](https://workshops.qiime2.org), or even as a text in university courses that cover QIIME 2. 

So grab a cup of coffee and let's get started! ☕

## Using this book
Part 1 of this book, _Microbiome Bioinformatics with QIIME 2_, is intended to be read sequentially. This section will teach you everything you need to know to get started using QIIME 2 for your own microbiome research, using example data sets along the way. As you learn to use the tools, you'll be introduced to underlying theory in microbiome bioinformatics. I also sprinkle in tips and tricks on how to get more out of QIIME 2, including how I use QIIME 2, so you'll be a QIIME 2 power user by the time you're done!  

If you'd like to learn more about the underlying algorithms used in microbiome research, some of those are covered in Part 2 chapters. The Part 2 chapters can be read sequentially but don't have to be. These chapters derive from my earlier online book, _An Introduction to Applied Bioinformatics_, but have been re-worked to focus on microbiome-relevant problems. If you're not interested in algorithmic details, but only on learning how to use QIIME 2, you can safely skip Part 2. Many of the algorithms discussed in these chapters are fundamentals of bioinformatics, so if you're interested in becoming a bioinformatician or bioinformatics software developer, you should read these.  

Part 3 is intended to be read sequentially. This will take you through different aspects of developing with QIIME 2. Most developers will be interested in creating plugins, so building, documenting, testing, and distributing QIIME 2 plugins is covered first. Building QIIME 2 plugins is a great way to get your bioinformatics tools in the hands of a lot of microbiome researchers. It comes with other benefits as well: QIIME 2's unique retrospective data provenance tracking system will be used whenever your plugins are run, ensuring reproducibility of the work and providing information that will help you provide technical support to users; your users will be able to access your functionality through any of QIIME 2's interfaces, which provide access to the same tools through interfaces geared toward users with different levels of computational sophisitcation; and QIIME 2 plugins are often published as stand-alone papers, so building QIIME 2 plugins can help you get the publications you may need to support your career. Part 3 also covers developing QIIME 2 interfaces. This content will help you integrate QIIME 2 as a component in another system you're developing, or allow you to implement your own ideas to make QIIME 2 more accessible. If you are considering wrapping QIIME 2 in another system, this content will give you tools to simplify that work through the QIIME 2 software development kit (SDK). QIIME 2 and the development team enthusiastically support your plugin and interface development efforts! Don't forget to get in touch on the forum with your QIIME 2 development questions.  

## Outline (this is just a temporary holding place)

1. Microbiome Bioinformatics with QIIME 2
	* Getting started: ways to use QIIME 2; installing QIIME 2 (refer to online documentation); download some data; do something very simple with the command line. 
	* A very brief first tutorial: a much-abbreviated version of a web-based overview tutorial, just allowing the user to do a few simple things; view provenance
	* A first look at core concepts of QIIME 2: semantic types, data provenance, Actions (methods, visualizers, pipelines), Results (artifacts, visualizations), importing (briefly); q2cli; artifact API (redo something from the very brief tutorial with the Artifact API).  
	* Importing: raw sequence data; other data. 
	* Quality control with DADA2, Deblur, others? Introduction to the FeatureTable and ASVs. 
	* To cluster, or not to cluster? Why would or wouldn't you want to do this? Historical perspective on why we started doing this; discussion of the types of clustering supported in QIIME 2. 
	* Taxonomy assignment: approaches; limits of resolution; training custom reference databases; non-16S data (probably the first time this matters?); taxonomy barplots; why statistics is hard on this (and we'll come back to how to do stats in the differential abundance testing chapter)
	* Alignment and phylogenetic reconstruction: why do we care about this? what is and isn't this tree good for?
	* Working with feature tables: filtering, ...
	* Count normalization: rarefaction and other methods
	* Alpha diversity: common metrics defined with worked examples; non-phylogenetic versus phylogenetic metrics; statistics; visualizations, including alpha rarefaction plots. 
	* Beta diversity: common metrics defined with worked examples; statistics; visualizations, including PCoA plots. 
	* Differential abundance testing
	* Longitudinal analysis
	* Supervised classification
	* Network analysis? 
	* Analysis of other -omics data types with QIIME 2: what you can do now; what you'll be able to do in the future
	* Integrated -omics analysis

2. Understanding the algorithms (this content comes from IAB)
	 * Pairwise sequence alignment
	 * Multiple sequence alignment
	 * Sequence database searching
	 * Machine learning with Naive Bayes and Random Forest
	 * Clustering methods

3. Developing with QIIME 2
	 * Architecture of QIIME 2
	 * Building a simple plugin: qiime2.plugin, usage API
	 * Building a more complex plugin: defining types, formats, and transformers
	 * Building a simple interface: qiime2.sdk

## List of works cited

```{bibliography} ../references.bib
:filter: docname in docnames
```

Commit message:

add disclaimer since this will now be on GH Pages

book/front-matter/intro.md, after:

```{warning}
Thanks for your interest in my QIIME 2 Jupyter Book project. This book is in an early stage of development, and **I don't recommend using it yet**. The commands presented are not guaranteed to work with any particular version of QIIME 2, the content is not complete or copy-edited, and the structure or content may change dramatically without any advance warning. 
```

# Preface

Microbes are everywhere. We have found these tiny organisms in the deepest regions of the ocean and in the upper atmosphere. We have found them in water that has been solid ice for millennia in the Antarctic and in boiling water in the geysers of Yellowstone National Park. They survive in the driest natural environments on Earth, including the Atacama Desert in Chile, where desiccation resistant microbes hide in the soil sometimes waiting ten years for the drop of rain that will jump start their metabolism long enough for them to reproduce before they return to dormancy. We find them in perpetually damp environments, like the intestinal tract of the human body where they are constantly the subject of inspection by our diligent immune cells, and where they impact our health in positive and negative ways that we are only beginning to understand. We have found microbes in our nuclear reactors, prompting questions about whether we could harness them as tiny machines to help us remediate environmental disasters of the past, present, and future. If we looked hard enough, I think we’d find them on the surface of the moon and Mars, though they are probably microbes who stowed away on our spacecraft and are now patiently waiting for a drop of water that may or may not ever show up. If we ever colonize those worlds, microbes will be an indispensable ally in creating an environment that could sustain us.

Microbes almost never live alone in the real world (i.e., outside of a laboratory). Rather they exist in communities of different species who are interacting with each other and their environment. Some of these communities will have many different types of organisms, and some will have only a few. Because of the large number of species and individuals involved, no two communities will ever be exactly alike, and quantifying differences between microbial communities is an important area of research at the moment. The types of interactions between organisms are also highly varied. These can include mutualistic relationships, where both organisms benefit from the interaction; parasitic relationships, where one organism exclusively benefits to the detriment of the other; and the full gradient in between. 

Relatively recently, the term microbiome has been used to describe the community of microbes in a given environment. Technically speaking, the term microbiome is said to refer to the collection of microbial genes across all of the microbes present in a given environment while the term microbiota refers to the collection of the organisms themselves. In practice, especially in popular science literature but also in the primary scientific literature, the term microbiome is used to refer to microbiota, and that’s how I’ll use it in this text. If I’m referring to the collective genes of microbiota, I’ll use the term microbial metagenome. 

In spite of their ubiquity and importance, our understanding of microbes and microbiomes is still in its infancy. As we crack their mysteries we stand to make major advances in basic and applied sciences. We’ll develop a better understanding of the origin of life on Earth, the processes of evolution including the origin of multicellular organisms, and rules governing the interaction of species in the environment. We will also develop tools that will help us improve human health, support sustainable agriculture, and reduce our impact on our planet. In other words, we’re in the midst of a scientific revolution that could improve our lives, our children’s lives, and our world. 

Microbiome science is everywhere. There are tens of articles published daily in the scientific literature, and many popular science articles and books present these findings to the world of non-scientists. Understainding the promises and limitations of the methods of microbiome science can help avoid misconceptions about microbiome research, and it's important for practioners of microbiome science to understand and convey the promise and limitations of our field. Misconceptions abound, frequently arising from the same sources as high-quality popular science microbiome reporting. For example, on 5 Feb 2015 [an article](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/06/nyregion/among-the-new-york-city-subways-millions-of-riders-a-study-finds-many-mystery-microbes.html) appeared in the New York Times noting (almost offhand) that _Yersinia pestis_, the organism responsible for bubonic plague, had been found in multiple locations throughout the New York City subway system as part of its normal built environment microbiome. This was rapidly followed up on 6 Feb 2015 with [an article](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/07/nyregion/bubonic-plague-in-the-subway-system-dont-worry-about-it.html) noting that there was probably not bubonic plague on the subway system after all, but rather that the approaches used by the research team are limited in their taxonomic resolution, and that likely a harmless close relative of _Y. pestis_ was observedi: "What the researchers probably found, [a spokesman for the university where the study originated] said, was bacteria from an unknown species or from organisms that happened to share some gene sequences with the plague bacterium...". As microbiome services and products are increasingly marketed directly to the public, consumers of microbiome research findings, products, and services need to know how to critically evaluate these offerings and their associated claims. As practioners in the field, we can help by ensuring that the methods we apply are appropriate and reliable, and that we make our work accessible. 

The technologies that are enabling work in microbiome science are the same that are driving the data revolution in biology. Primarily this work is driven by high-throughput DNA sequencing, which is applied for profiling microbial community composition (e.g., marker gene profiling such as 16S or ITS sequencing), functional potential (such as shotgun metagenomic sequencing), and functional activity (such as metatranscriptome sequencing). Other “omics” technologies are now playing an increasing role in microbiome research, such as mass-spectrometry-based metabolomics, which provides profiles of small molecule metabolites in an environment, and metaproteomics which provides more detailed descriptions of functional activities of microbes (and their hosts, if applicable). As a result, bioinformatics software tools are essential to microbiome research. For many microbiome researchers, bioinformatics is an intimidating and challenging aspect of their projects. 

My focus for the past decade has been on developing tools to empower researchers to analyze their microbiome data. This work is centered around the QIIME microbiome bioinformatics platform, and currently QIIME 2. The original QIIME, now referred to as [QIIME 1](http://qiime.org), was published in 2010 {cite}`qiime1` and has been [cited tens of thousands of times in the primary literature](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=16903127068530972426&as_sdt=805&sciodt=0,3&hl=en). QIIME 2, which was published in July of 2019 {cite}`qiime2`, [succeeded QIIME 1 on 1 January 2018](https://qiime.wordpress.com/2018/01/03/qiime-2-has-succeeded-qiime-1/). QIIME 2 is better than QIIME 1 in all ways, and QIIME 1 is no longer actively supported. If you have previously used QIIME 1, you should invest time in learning and switching to QIIME 2. If you're new to QIIME, start with QIIME 2. (When I refer to _QIIME_ in this book, without specifying whether I'm referring to QIIME 1 or QIIME 2, I'm refering to the platform generally.)

QIIME 2 has large and growing user and developer communities, and these communities make QIIME 2 possible. The epicenter of the community is the [QIIME 2 Forum](https://forum.qiime2.org). The forum is primarily known as a place where users can get technical support with QIIME 2 for no charge. Developers of QIIME 2 moderate the forum, and typically repond to technical support questions within a couple of business days. The forum is also a great place to discuss general topics in microbiome bioinformatics, or microbiome research methods generally. There are many active discussions on these topics on the forum. Keeping up with the discussions on the forum is a great way to learn about current topics in microbiome research methods. There's also a free job board on the forum - you can use the forum to find jobs, or post your own job ads there to find employees who are well-versed in QIIME 2 and other bioinformatics tools. If you're not already a member of the QIIME 2 Forum, you should consider joining. It's a great way for you to get help, and as you develop your QIIME 2 skills helping others on the forum is a great way to reenforce your learning and to get involved in the community.

The QIIME 2 project is popular, essential to microbiome research, and (as of this writing) stabley funded through federal and other grants. Time spent reading this book and learning QIIME 2 will help you to advance your microbiome research projects. This book can be used for self-learning, as a companion text in [QIIME 2 workshops](https://workshops.qiime2.org), or even as a text in university courses that cover QIIME 2. 

So grab a cup of coffee and let's get started! ☕

## Using this book
Part 1 of this book, _Microbiome Bioinformatics with QIIME 2_, is intended to be read sequentially. This section will teach you everything you need to know to get started using QIIME 2 for your own microbiome research, using example data sets along the way. As you learn to use the tools, you'll be introduced to underlying theory in microbiome bioinformatics. I also sprinkle in tips and tricks on how to get more out of QIIME 2, including how I use QIIME 2, so you'll be a QIIME 2 power user by the time you're done!  

If you'd like to learn more about the underlying algorithms used in microbiome research, some of those are covered in Part 2 chapters. The Part 2 chapters can be read sequentially but don't have to be. These chapters derive from my earlier online book, _An Introduction to Applied Bioinformatics_, but have been re-worked to focus on microbiome-relevant problems. If you're not interested in algorithmic details, but only on learning how to use QIIME 2, you can safely skip Part 2. Many of the algorithms discussed in these chapters are fundamentals of bioinformatics, so if you're interested in becoming a bioinformatician or bioinformatics software developer, you should read these.  

Part 3 is intended to be read sequentially. This will take you through different aspects of developing with QIIME 2. Most developers will be interested in creating plugins, so building, documenting, testing, and distributing QIIME 2 plugins is covered first. Building QIIME 2 plugins is a great way to get your bioinformatics tools in the hands of a lot of microbiome researchers. It comes with other benefits as well: QIIME 2's unique retrospective data provenance tracking system will be used whenever your plugins are run, ensuring reproducibility of the work and providing information that will help you provide technical support to users; your users will be able to access your functionality through any of QIIME 2's interfaces, which provide access to the same tools through interfaces geared toward users with different levels of computational sophisitcation; and QIIME 2 plugins are often published as stand-alone papers, so building QIIME 2 plugins can help you get the publications you may need to support your career. Part 3 also covers developing QIIME 2 interfaces. This content will help you integrate QIIME 2 as a component in another system you're developing, or allow you to implement your own ideas to make QIIME 2 more accessible. If you are considering wrapping QIIME 2 in another system, this content will give you tools to simplify that work through the QIIME 2 software development kit (SDK). QIIME 2 and the development team enthusiastically support your plugin and interface development efforts! Don't forget to get in touch on the forum with your QIIME 2 development questions.  

## Outline (this is just a temporary holding place)

1. Microbiome Bioinformatics with QIIME 2
	* Getting started: ways to use QIIME 2; installing QIIME 2 (refer to online documentation); download some data; do something very simple with the command line. 
	* A very brief first tutorial: a much-abbreviated version of a web-based overview tutorial, just allowing the user to do a few simple things; view provenance
	* A first look at core concepts of QIIME 2: semantic types, data provenance, Actions (methods, visualizers, pipelines), Results (artifacts, visualizations), importing (briefly); q2cli; artifact API (redo something from the very brief tutorial with the Artifact API).  
	* Importing: raw sequence data; other data. 
	* Quality control with DADA2, Deblur, others? Introduction to the FeatureTable and ASVs. 
	* To cluster, or not to cluster? Why would or wouldn't you want to do this? Historical perspective on why we started doing this; discussion of the types of clustering supported in QIIME 2. 
	* Taxonomy assignment: approaches; limits of resolution; training custom reference databases; non-16S data (probably the first time this matters?); taxonomy barplots; why statistics is hard on this (and we'll come back to how to do stats in the differential abundance testing chapter)
	* Alignment and phylogenetic reconstruction: why do we care about this? what is and isn't this tree good for?
	* Working with feature tables: filtering, ...
	* Count normalization: rarefaction and other methods
	* Alpha diversity: common metrics defined with worked examples; non-phylogenetic versus phylogenetic metrics; statistics; visualizations, including alpha rarefaction plots. 
	* Beta diversity: common metrics defined with worked examples; statistics; visualizations, including PCoA plots. 
	* Differential abundance testing
	* Longitudinal analysis
	* Supervised classification
	* Network analysis? 
	* Analysis of other -omics data types with QIIME 2: what you can do now; what you'll be able to do in the future
	* Integrated -omics analysis

2. Understanding the algorithms (this content comes from IAB)
	 * Pairwise sequence alignment
	 * Multiple sequence alignment
	 * Sequence database searching
	 * Machine learning with Naive Bayes and Random Forest
	 * Clustering methods

3. Developing with QIIME 2
	 * Architecture of QIIME 2
	 * Building a simple plugin: qiime2.plugin, usage API
	 * Building a more complex plugin: defining types, formats, and transformers
	 * Building a simple interface: qiime2.sdk

## List of works cited

```{bibliography} ../references.bib
:filter: docname in docnames
```
