# Getting started with using QIIME 2

This chapter will briefly introduce a few concepts that you should understand as you start using QIIME 2. This chapter is purposefully brief so you can get to the fun stuff soon. After reading this chapter you'll understand some key QIIME 2 terminology that will be used throughout this book.

## QIIME 2 archives

One of the first things that new QIIME 2 users often notice is the `.qza` and `.qzv` files that QIIME 2 uses. All files generated by QIIME 2 are either `.qza` or `.qzv` files, and these are simply zip files that store your data alongside some QIIME 2-specific metadata. You can unzip these files with any typical unzip utility, such as WinZip, 7Zip, or unzip, and you don't need to have QIIME 2 installed to do that. 

For example, let's download a `.qza` file and take a quick look. 

```bash
$ wget https://some/url/to/sequences.qza
$ unzip sequences.qza
...
```

There are a few things I want you to notice from this example. First, we didn't use any QIIME 2 commands. We just unzipped the file as we would unzip any zip file. Next, you'll see there are two top-level directories in the output: `data` and `metadata`. The `data` directory contains a single file, `sequences.fasta`, which contains (you guessed it!) sequence data in fasta format.  If, for example, you're interested in getting some sequence data out of QIIME 2 to analyze it with another program, you can unzip your `.qza` file, and use the `sequences.fasta` file for what ever you need to do with it. Allowing users to access their data _without_ QIIME 2 was one of the earliest design goals of the system. This ensures that if QIIME 2 isn't available to you for some reason, you can still access any data that you generated with QIIME 2. You might then wonder why we bothered with having QIIME 2 create these zip files in the first place, rather than just have it use the typical file formats like fasta, newick, biom, and so on. That has to do with the other information stored in the zip file - specifically the many files contained in the `metadata directory. The files in the `metadata` directory are not intended to be viewed by a human, and you don't need any of them to work with the file (or files) in the `data` directory. QIIME 2 uses the information in the `metadata` directory to record data provenance, helping you to ensure that your bioinformatics work will be reproducible, to record the semantic type of the data (we'll come back to that shortly), and to store a unique identifier for the data. This metadata provides many benefits that will be more clear as you get further along in your learning. We'll revisit this topic throughout the book. 

The `.qza` file extension is an abbreviation for QIIME Zipped Artifact, and the `.qzv` file extension is an abbreviation for QIIME Zipped Visualization. `.qza` files (which are often simply referred to as _artifacts_) are intermediary files in a QIIME 2 analysis, using containing raw data of some sort. These files are generated by QIIME 2 and are intended to be consummed by QIIME 2. `.qzv`` files (which are often simply referred to as _visualizations_) are terminal results in a QIIME 2 analysis, such as an interactive figure or the results of a statistical test. These files are generated by QIIME 2 and are intended to be consummed by a human.

QIIME 2 also provides some of its own utilities for getting data out of `.qza` and `.qzv` files. If you're working with the QIIME 2 command line interface (which we'll use a lot in this book), the most relevant command is `qiime tools export`. If you were to run this on the `.qza` file we downloaded above, you'd see the following:

```bash
$ qiime tools export --input-path sequences.qza --output-path exported-sequences/
```

This command will unzip the archive, and take all of the files from the `data` directory and place them in `exported-sequences`. Thus if you do have QIIME 2 installed, you have get your data out of a QIIME 2 artifact without all of the QIIME 2-specific metadata, using this command. 

```{note}
It has been brought to our attention that the term _artifact_ can be confusing, since it is often used in science to indicate a feature that is not present naturally in a system but rather observed as a result of some technical aspect of study of that system. For example, homopolyer runs such as the `A`s in `ACTGTACTAAAAAAAAAAATGCACGTGAC` were commonly reported by some early sequencing instruments to be longer then they were in nature due to the way the sequencing reaction worked. In QIIME 2 we use the defintion of an artifact as an object that was created by some process, like an archaeological artifact. This is common in data science, and we didn't realize the potential for confusion until we were a little too far along to easily change the name.   
```  

## Semantic types 



## Plugins and actions



## Installing QIIME 2 




